# Lab 08.29

## Part I 

### Goals
* Review all of the basic commands
	* cp, mkdir, rm, pwd, ls
* Intro to using a text editor
	* Vim
* Tarball creation
	* How to use tar
* Reviewing hidden dot files

### Step 1

In your `cs210` folder create a new folder named `lab03`

`$ cd ~/cs210`  
`$ mkdir lab03`

Navigate to the newly created lab folder.

`$ cd lab03`

### Step 2

Copy files from my pickup folder containing files for you to modify for your usage.

`$ cp -r /home/faculty/mcarrier/pickup/cs210/lab03/* .`

The above copy command includes the -r flag which means copy files recursively. The destination in this case is a `.` which means to copy to the current directory.

### Step 3

Extract the contents of the tar file by using the following command.

`$ tar -xf lab3_resources.tar`

Tar is a utility used for creating archives which in many cases are compressed. The flags `x` and `f` are used for extracting the file that is passed in as an argument.

List files in the current directory by running `ls` You should see the following output.

```
$ ls
lab3_resources.tgz lab3_resources
```

List files inside the lab3_resources folder by running `ls` again but this time passing in the folder name.

`$ ls lab3_resources`

No files are showing up in the folder… Try running ls again but this time with the flags `-a`

`$ ls -a lab3_resources`

### Step 4

Open up the `.bash_profile` file with Vim using the following command

`$ vim lab3_resources/.bash_profile`

In vim uncomment the following lines starting with alias by removing the pound sign:

```
# Prompt before deleting a file
# alias rm='rm -i'

# Adds some color to highlight folders when using ls
# alias l='ls --color'

```

Save your modifications by using `:w`
Quit vim by pressing `:q`

Open Vim by running `$ vim email.txt` 

Add your first and last name to the first line
followed by your email on the second line. Finally add your cwolf username on the 3rd line.

__Example:__

```
FirstName LastName
email@seawolf.sonoma.edu
cwolfusername

```
This email address will be used as part of a future lab.

Save the file and quit vim.

### Step 5

Copy your modified `.bash_profile` to your home directory using the following command:

> __CAUTION:__ If you copy a file to one that already exists it will be overwritten.

`cp lab3_resources/.bash_profile ~/.bash_profile`

List files in your home directory to confirm the file has been copied.

`ls -a ~`

Logout and log back into cwolf. You should now be able to show files in a directory using just the l command instead of `ls -l`.

Trying to delete future files will prompt you before removing. To disable this behavior edit your `.bash_profile` by either removing the alias or by adding a comment in front of it by using a `#`.

### Step 6

Navigate back into the lab folder by using the command: 

`cd cs210/lab03`

`rm lab3_resources.tgz`

You should be prompted about removing the file before completing the action.

Run `ls -Ra` The `-R` flag will list all files recursively from the directory you are currently in. You should see the following output. The a flag will show hidden files. (all files)

```
$ ls -Ra
.
..
email.txt
--- lab3_resources ---
.bash_profile

```

Run `pwd` to confirm you are in the following location:

```
$ pwd
/home/students/username/cs210/lab03
```
Lets move the email.txt file into the lab3_resources folder.

> __CAUTION:__ If you move or rename a file to one that already exists it will be overwritten.

`$ mv email.txt lab3_resources/`

Next lets rename `lab3_resources` to `yourLastName_lab3`

Ex:  
`$ mv lab3_resources yourLastName_lab3`

Double check that `yourLastName_lab3` contains all of the files for submissions

```
$ ls -a yourLastName_lab3
.bash_profile email.txt

```

We are now going to zip the folder containing your modifications and submit it.

To zip the folder run   

`tar cfvz <destination file> <source location>`

`$ tar cfvz yourLastName_lab3.tgz yourLastName_lab3`

> c - create archive  
> f - write to file  
> v - show verbose output    
> z - gzip compress  

Next submit the lab by copying it to the dropbox.

`$ cp yourLastName_lab3.tgz /home/faculty/mcarrier/dropbox/cs210/2013.08.29`
