# Lab 09.26

## Github

* Create a [Github](http://github.com/) account
* Fork the class webpage repository [webpage](https://github.com/icecreammatt/class-website-template)
* Fork the repo on Github by using the `+Fork` button.

	> If you get stuck try reading [About Forking](https://help.github.com/articles/fork-a-repo)

* On cwolf go to your home directory and create a folder named `public_html` if you don't already have one.
* Set folder permissions on the folder so it is visible by running `chmod 755 public_html`
* Inside of that folder create a folder named `210site`. Set permissions on this folder again by running `chmod 755 public_html`
* Go into the `210site` before running the clone command.
* Clone the repository by running the following command
	`git clone https://github.com/USERNAME/class-website-template.git`
	> If you see this message: 
	> `fatal: https://github.com/USERNAME/class-website-template.git/info/refs?service=git-upload-pack not found: did you run git update-server-info on the server?`
	> Make sure to replace USERNAME with your github username

* At this point you should be able to view your copy of the website by visiting `www.cs.sonoma.edu/~USERNAME/210site`

* Back in the terminal create a new branch and then check it out.
	* `git branch reviewQuestion`
	* `git branch -a`
	* `git checkout reviewQuestion`
* Add some review questions
	* Go into the content directory and open review.md in your favorite text editor
	* Add some questions to the bottom of the list
	* Save the file and exit
* Review the changes you made by running `git diff`
* Stage your changes by running `git add review.md`
* Run `git status` to confirm that your changes are staged
* Commit your changes. `git commit`
	* Add a message describing what question you have added
* Push to origin
	* `git push origin reviewQuestion`  

	> "origin" is the default server name for the repository you have cloned from.

* Open a pull request to have your branch merged into the repository you have forked from.
	> Read more about pull requests [here](https://help.github.com/articles/using-pull-requests)
* Fix merge conflicts if you have any
	* To fix merge conflicts add the upstream branch to your repository by running the following commands.
	* `git remote add upstream https://github.com/icecreammatt/class-website-template`
	* `git fetch`
	* `git branch -a`
	* Look for `remotes/upstream/master`
	* `git checkout upstream/master`
	* `git merge upstream/master`
	* Edit `review.md` by looking for `<<<<<<<` anything between `======` and `>>>>>>>` is where the merge conflicts occurred.
	* Fix the file so duplications are removed and so it makes sense without accidentally removing any old content.
	* Delete `<<<<<<`, `======`, and `>>>>>`
	* Save the file
	* `git add review.md`
	* `git commit -m 'Resolved merge conflict'`
		> `git commit -m 'my message'` is a short hand to quickly make commit messages in the terminal
* Running git log should show a merge commit as well as changes that happened while you were editing.
* Re push changes by running:
	* `git push origin reviewQuestion`

The changes will be merged into the master branch and uploaded to the main website once all of the merge conflicts have been dealt with.
