# 09.19 - Git

## Topics for Today
* Review pipes and output redirection
* Review awk
* Quiz on pipes, redirection and filters
* Intro Git

### Lab
* Init, Adding files, committing, diffing, recovering deleted files, restoring previous versions

### __Homework__ 
* Come to class with Github and Bitbucket accounts
* Come to class with three questions for a study guide

## Git Overview
* Version control system

* Advantages
	* Open Source
	* Distributed
	* Local commits
	* Quick Setup
	* Very fast branching
	* Internet access not required
	* Github is awesome
	* As long as code is committed nothing can ever be lost!

* Disadvantages
	* Difficult to learn compared to others

* What can it do for me?
	* Version code
	* Keep history of changes
	* Quickly diff changes between code
	* Easily undo unwanted code changes
	* Can save lots of time finding bugs
	* Automatically merge branches of code together
	* Allow for easy collaboration on projects
	
### Git Workflow Basics
* Installer [http://git-scm.com/](http://git-scm.com/)  (This should already be on the lab computers)  
* See [here](http://git-scm.com/documentation) for more detailed instructions on how to use git.

#### Git Status
At any time you can run `git status` to see what has changed in the repository.

#### Reflog

`git reflog`

The ref log records all of the actions you do within git. This can be used to recover files, branches, commits and can be used to recover from tricky situations.

#### Adding files to git
1. Run `git init` in the folder you wish to use git in
2. Add files and folders you wish to track by running `git add <file or folder name>` or use `git add .` to add them all. This is called staging files.
3. Run `git commit` to create a commit and create a hash with a time stamp that you can checkout or revert to later. This will open vim, alternatively you can run `git commit -m <Message text here>` to do quick short messages

#### Viewing previous commits
* `git log` (`j` and `k` to scroll up and down, `q` to quit)
* `git show <commit hash>`
* To view changes from a given commit copy the first 6 or so characters from the hash and run `git show <commit hash>` for example `git show 8e82d74`

#### Show what has changed since the last commit
* `git diff` will show what you have altered since the last commit.
* `git diff --cached` will show what you have added or staged since the last commit

#### Reverting changes
* `git checkout <filepath>`

#### Resetting all changes since last commit
The following will delete all changes since the last commit. Use this with caution.

* `git reset --hard HEAD`

#### Stashes

To quickly stash changes you have made since the last commit use `git stash save 'Description of stash'`

Use `git stash pop` to apply the most recent stash to the code. This is handy for moving changes between branches.

`git stash list` to view all stashes.

#### Branching

To branch code for a feature or experimentation run `git branch featureName` and then `git checkout featureName`

From here you can make all the changes you want and if you need to switch back to a different version of code checkout the master branch again. `git checkout master`
Use `git branch -a` to list all available branches.

To merge changes back into the master branch first checkout the master branch running `git checkout master` next run `git merge featureName` Look at the commit log to see if the changes have gone into effect.

#### .gitignore file

Create a file named `.gitignore` and add any files or extensions to exclude from the repo.

```
*.*~
*.o
*.out
*.x

```
#### gitk

`gitk` is a lightweight interface for viewing past commits and code changes

#### Instaweb

From Mac or Linux run the following to host a local git site.

> __NOTE:__ This needs to be ran locally. It will __not__ work on cwolf.

To start  
`git instaweb -d webrick --start`

Visit this URL after it has started  
[http://localhost:1234/](http://localhost:1234/?p=.git;a=summary)

To stop  
`git instaweb -d webrick --stop`

### SourceTree (Mac & Windows)
* [SourceTree](http://www.sourcetreeapp.com/)

This is a free git tool that has a very nice interface for using git without the command line.

## Intro to Git with Demo

* Review with current lab
* Add changes
* Commit them to disk
* Checkout the previous version to restore old
* View the log
* View the Diff
* Reset
* Discard changes