
# CS210 - Introduction to Unix, Fall 2013
# Lab 1.1

In this lab you will use some of the commands we've talked about today.  Some new concepts will be introduced.

##Starting State
My assumption is that you are sitting at a Mac with no terminal window open.  Most of our work will be done on cwolf, so the first step of any lab will usually be to log into cwolf.
* Open a terminal window by either using the terminal window at the bottom of the screen, or by pressing "Command-T".
* SSH into cwolf using "ssh <username>@cwolf.cs.sonoma.edu".  You will be prompted for your cwolf password.
* Run "hostname" and ensure it says "cwolf.cs.sonoma.edu".

##Exercises
* Run the "pwd" command to see what the full path to your home directory is.

* Create a directory where you can store files that pertain to this lab.  Name the directory "~/cs210/lab1.1".  Recall that "~" is a shortcut for "my home directory".  Thus, you are creating a subdirectory called "cs210" and another subdirectory beneath that one called "lab1.1".  Try creating the directories with the command "mkdir cs210/lab1.1".  You should get an error.  That's because "mkdir" won't create nested directories (in this case the "lab1.1" directory) if the parent doesn't exist.  You have two options.  You can create the directories one at a time, or you can create them together using the "-p" argument.  Use one of those mechanisms to create the directories.

* "cd" into your cs210/lab1.1 directory.  Then return to your home directory using the "cd" with no arguments.  "cd" with no arguments always takes you home.  There are other variations that will do the same thing. For example, "cd ~" (because "~" always means home).

* Use "cd -" to return to the cs210/lab1.1 directory.  You can use "cd -" to return to the previous directory.  It will toggle you back and forth.

* From "cs210/lab1.1" use "cd ../.." to return home.  Do you see why this takes you home?  The ".." special directory name always means "the parent".  When you run this command it takes you to the parent of the parent of your current directory.

* Use the up arrow key and down arrow key to cycle through your current history of commands.  You can edit older commands by using the "delete" key or left and right arrow keys.  That might save you some time typing commands in the future.

* Return to the cs210/lab1.1 directory by whatever means you desire.

* Run "ls" to get a listing of files in this directory.  Do you expect to see any files?  You shouldn't.  Now run "ls -a" to show hidden files.  Can you explain the two files you see?

* Once again, return to the home directory.  Run "ls" and "ls -a" to see the files that already exist in your home directory.  Which do you recognize and expect?  Are there any you don't expect?

* Run "pwd" to find the full path to your home directory.  Now append "/cs210/lab1.1" to that string, and cd to it.  This is an example of cd'ing using the full path from the root directory.  Once you are done you should be sitting again in your lab1.1 directory.

* Run "ls ../.." to list the contents of your home directory.  This shows how to get a directory listing using a relative path.  Run "ls /" to list the contents of the root directory.  Do you consider "/" to be a rull path or a relative path?  It's a full path, but the shortest one you'll ever see.

* Create an empty file in your lab1.1 directory using the "touch" command.  If you don't remember how to use "touch" run "man touch" for the manual page.  Call the file "file1".

* Run "ls" to ensure the file exists.

* Run "cp" to copy the file to a new file called "file2".

* Remove the original "file1" with the "rm" command.

* Copy "file2" to "file1".  Do an "ls" to ensure both files exist.

* Move "file2" to "file3".  Do an "ls".  How many files do you expect to see?  You should see just two: "file1" and "file3".

* Create the following directories using a single "mkdir" command from your home directory: "~/a/really/long/path".

* Change to the path directory using a single command, instead of cd'ing step by step.

* Use cd to move up two directories.

* Say we want to remove the directories "long" and "long/path".  Try the following commands and examine the responses.
  * rm long
  * rm long/path
  * rmdir long

* Now try "rm -r long".  Use "ls" to see whether the directories are still there.

##Questions


