# Linux Server Setup
 Featuring Amazon AWS

## Part I: (VirtualBox)

1. Boot into OSX
1. Download and install VirtualBox for OSX
1. Download the Ubuntu image from carrier.cs.sonoma.edu/downloads/ubuntu.tgz 
1. Extract the tgz file and double click on Ubuntu Server.vbox
1. Before clicking Show click Settings and then Network then adapter 1 and switch it from nat to Bridged Adapter.
1. Load Image in Virtual box and start up the server
1. Login to the virtual machine using the username student with password student
1. Create a folder for the ssh keys in ~/.ssh and cd ~/.ssh
1. Create a new ssh key by running: `ssh-keygen -t rsa`
1. Add the public key to the authorized keys `cat id_rsa.pub > authorized_keys`
1. Run ifconfig to get the IPAddress of the VirtualMachine
1. Confirm that the address is starting with 130.157.167.*
1. Attempt to ping the VM from the machine which is hosting it. (The Mac OS)
1. Once you can ping the machien we can move on.
1. Copy the private key off the virtual machine and onto the local mac.
    * mkdir ~/.ssh
    * scp student@IP_ADDRESS:~/.ssh/id_rsa ~/.ssh
    * Attempt to login to the machine it shouldn't prompt you for a password now.  
      that the private key is stored locally.
    * ssh student@IP_ADDRESS

## Part I: Elastic Cloud Server Setup

1. Create an account on [aws.amazon.com](https://aws.amazon.com/)

2. Go to the administration [console](https://console.aws.amazon.com)

3. Click on the EC2 (Virtual Servers in the Cloud) link under Compute & Networking

4. Click the launch instance button to create a new Machine.
	* Pick the Ubuntu Server 13.10 instance under the Free tier eligible with 64bit selected.

5. Click Configure Instance Details
	* Check the box to enable termination protection

6. Click next Add Storage
	* The Default 8GB is enough for this lab, but if you want more you can add up to 30 for free.
	* Uncheck the box that says Delete on Termination

7. Click Next Tag Instance
	* Key: Name
	* Value: Ubuntu Server

8. Click Configure Security Group 
	* Under Protocol ensure the following are added  
	`SSH | TCP | 22 | Anywhere`
	* Add new rules with the following settings  
	`HTTP | TCP | 80 | Anywhere`

9. Finally Click Review and Launch
	* Click Launch and a window will popup asking to select an existing key pair or create a new key pair.
	* Select Create a new key pair
	* Name your key pair `username-ubuntu-server` 
	* __IMPORTANT: Click Download key pair__ before attempting to launch the instance. This key is required to login to your machine. Should you loose it you will have to start over. Back this up in a safe place.
	* After downloading the key pair click launch instances.
	* You should now be on a status screen with a green check mark saying "Your instance is now launching"

10. Click View Instances
	* Status check will likely say initializing or 2/2 checks passed 
	* Copy the public DNS entry to a text editor for later reference. It will look something like this:  
	`ec2-54-201-77-152.us-west-2.compute.amazonaws.com`

11. Copy your `username-ubuntu-server.pem.txt` file into your .ssh folder.

	* If you are working on a lab machine run the following command:  
	`scp ~/downloads/username-ubuntu-server.pem.txt username@cwolf.cs.sonoma.edu:.ssh/`
	* If you are working on your personal machine you can copy it directory from your downloads folder into your .ssh folder in your home directory.   
	> If the `.ssh` directory doesn't exist create it. 
	> `mkdir ~/.ssh`
	
12. In the `.ssh` folder create a new file named `config` with no extension. The contents of the file should look roughly like the following.

```
Host ubuntu  
    Hostname ec2-54-201-77-152.us-west-2.compute.amazonaws.com  
    User ubuntu  
    IdentityFile ~/.ssh/username-ubuntu-server.pem.txt    
``` 

13. Change permissions of the private key so it can be used to connect by running the following:   
 `chmod 600 username-ubuntu-server.pem.txt`

14. Attempt to connect to the server by using the following command  
`ssh ubuntu`

```
	
➜  ~  ssh ubuntu
		The authenticity of host 'ec2-54-201-77-152.us-west-2.compute.amazonaws.com (54.201.77.152)' can't be established.
RSA key fingerprint is e8:62:88:5c:0e:67:b1:bf:8c:1d:fe:20:d6:49:1e:ac.
Are you sure you want to continue connecting (yes/no)? yes
Warning: Permanently added 'ec2-54-201-77-152.us-west-2.compute.amazonaws.com,54.201.77.152' (RSA) to the list of known hosts.

The programs included with the Ubuntu system are free software;
the exact distribution terms for each program are described in the
individual files in /usr/share/doc/*/copyright.

Ubuntu comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by
applicable law.

ubuntu@ip-172-31-27-115:~$

```

## Part II: Server Account Administration

### Setting up user accounts

1. Create a new group if you doing this in the virtual machine

`sudo addgroup admin`

1. Create a new user account for yourself

```
ubuntu@ip-172-31-27-115:~$ sudo adduser matt
Adding user `matt' ...
Adding new group `matt' (1001) ...
Adding new user `matt' (1001) with group `matt' ...
Creating home directory `/home/matt' ...
Copying files from `/etc/skel' ...
Enter new UNIX password:
Retype new UNIX password:
passwd: password updated successfully
Changing the user information for matt
Enter the new value, or press ENTER for the default
	Full Name []: Matt Carrier
	Room Number []:
	Work Phone []:
	Home Phone []:
	Other []:
Is the information correct? [Y/n] y
ubuntu@ip-172-31-27-115:~$
```

Add your user account to the sudo users  
`ubuntu@ip-172-31-27-115:~$ sudo usermod -a -G admin matt`

[http://xkcd.com/149/](http://xkcd.com/149/)

Copy your authorized ssh key to the account
```
ubuntu@ip-172-31-27-115:~$ sudo mkdir /home/matt/.ssh
ubuntu@ip-172-31-27-115:~$ sudo cp ~/.ssh/authorized_keys /home/matt/.ssh/
```
Finally change the owner of the new account to the newly created user.
```
sudo chown matt /home/matt/.ssh/authorized_keys
sudo chown matt /home/matt/.ssh/
sudo chown matt /home/matt/
```

Add users to the sshd_config  
`sudo vim /etc/ssh/sshd_config`

At the very bottom of the file add the following:  
`AllowUsers ubuntu matt`

Save the file and then restart the ssh service.  
`sudo service ssh restart`

On your local machine modify your ssh config file to include the new user you have added.

	Host username@aws
	    Hostname ec2-54-201-77-152.us-west-2.compute.amazonaws.com
	    User username
	    IdentityFile ~/.ssh/username-ubuntu-server.pem.txt

Test logging in with the new user account. `ssh username@aws`

### Installing basic packages

* Install Git  
`sudo apt-get install git-core`

* Optional: If you want to use emacs. (Vim is already installed by default)  
`sudo apt-get install emacs`

* Install zsh  
`sudo apt-get install zsh`

* Install [Oh-My-Zsh](https://github.com/robbyrussell/oh-my-zsh)  
`curl -L https://github.com/robbyrussell/oh-my-zsh/raw/master/tools/install.sh | sh`

* Run `chsh` to change your default shell. Enter your password.

	`Login Shell [/bin/bash]: /bin/zsh`

* Clone your dotfiles from Github and run your setup script to copy over your settings

		cd ~/
		git clone https://github.com/username/dotfiles.git
		cd dotfiles
		./setup.sh

## Part III: Setting up a NodeJS application

### Installing and Testing NodeJS

* Follow the instructions [here](https://github.com/joyent/node/wiki/Installing-Node.js-via-package-manager#ubuntu-mint-elementary-os) to install NodeJS

* Create a file named `server.js` with the contents below:

```
	var http = require('http');
			http.createServer(function (req, res) {
	  res.writeHead(200, {'Content-Type': 'text/plain'});
	  res.end('Hello World\n');
	}).listen(3000, '127.0.0.1');
	console.log('Server running at http://127.0.0.1:3000/');
```

* Run test application  

```
	sudo node server.js &
	[1] 26720
	curl localhost:3000
	Hello World
	sudo kill 26720
```

### Installing and configuring Nginx (webserver)

* Install the nginx web server  
`sudo apt-get install nginx`

* Restart nginx  
`sudo /etc/init.d/nginx restart`

* Confirm nginx is running  
`curl localhost`

	<blockquote>
	<head>
	<title>Welcome to nginx!</title>
	<style>
	</style>
	</head>
	<body>
	<h1>Welcome to nginx!</h1>
	<p>If you see this page, the nginx web server is successfully installed and
	working. Further configuration is required.</p>
	
	<p>For online documentation and support please refer to
	<a href="http://nginx.org/">nginx.org</a>.<br/>
	Commercial support is available at
	<a href="http://nginx.com/">nginx.com</a>.</p>
	
	<p><em>Thank you for using nginx.</em></p>
	</body>
	</blockquote>

* Visit this page in a browser to confirm it is working
`http://ec2-##-###-##-###.us-west-2.compute.amazonaws.com`

#### Configuration 

Edit the nginx config file following these [instructions](http://stackoverflow.com/a/5015178/873559)

Backup the default config before making changes to it.

```
sudo cp /etc/nginx/sites-available/default /etc/nginx/sites-available/default.backup
sudo vim /etc/nginx/sites-available/default

```

default

```
upstream localhost {
    server 127.0.0.1:3000;
}

server {
    #listen 80 default_server;
    listen 0.0.0.0:80;
    listen [::]:80 default_server ipv6only=on;

    #root /usr/share/nginx/html;
    #index index.html index.htm;

    # Make site accessible from http://localhost/
    server_name localhost;
    access_log /var/log/nginx/test.log;

    location / {
        # First attempt to serve request as file, then
        # as directory, then fall back to displaying a 404.
        #try_files $uri $uri/ /index.html;
        # Uncomment to enable naxsi on this location
        # include /etc/nginx/naxsi.rules
        proxy_set_header X-Real-IP $remote_addr;
        proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-For $proxy_add_x_forwarded_for;
        proxy_set_header Host $http_host;
        proxy_set_header X-NginX-Proxy true;

        proxy_pass http://localhost/;
        proxy_redirect off;

        proxy_http_version 1.1;
        proxy_set_header Upgrade $http_upgrade;
        proxy_set_header Connection "upgrade";
    }

    location /doc/ {
        alias /usr/share/doc/;
        autoindex on;
        allow 127.0.0.1;
        allow ::1;
        deny all;
    }
}
```

Restart nginx

`sudo /etc/init.d/nginx restart`

Run the nodejs application again

```
node server.js
curl localhost
Hello World
```

Visit your url to the server in the browser. It should now be displaying "Hello World"  
`http://ec2-##-###-##-###.us-west-2.compute.amazonaws.com`

## Upgrading

* You should install updates and security patches as often as possible
Use `sudo apt-get update` to download the updates and then `sudo apt-get upgrade` to install them.

* Another thing to flip on is IPTables and fail2ban to keep unauthorized users from accessing your server. See the link at the bottom about securing a linux server for more info.

Make sure to shutdown the server when you are done using it. Amazon providers 750 hours for their free tier with 1 server. Note that when you do shutdown the ip address will change. After 1 year they will begin charging you for usage.

`sudo shutdown -h now`

## Resources

* [http://spenserj.com/blog/2013/07/15/securing-a-linux-server/](http://spenserj.com/blog/2013/07/15/securing-a-linux-server/)
* [http://nodejs.org](http://nodejs.org)
