
# CS210 - Introduction to Unix, Fall 2013
# Lab 1.2

In this lab you will use some simple vi features to edit a file.  Then you will use vi to create a C++ program.  You'll compile it with gcc a few different times, exploring various options.

##Starting State
Ensure you are logged into cwolf, and sitting in your home directory.  In other words, when you run the "pwd" command it should say something like "/home/<name>".

##Exercises
* Create a directory called "cs210/lab1.2" and cd to it.

###Entering Text

* Run "vi" with no arguments.  This is the "splash" screen for vim.  Recall that vi is a modal editor.  You always start by default in "Command Mode" where everything you type is a command.  Exit from vi without making any changes using the ":q" command.

* Run "vi" again.  Press "i" to enter "insert" mode (or, more generally, "Text Entry" mode).  The lower left corner of the terminal should say "-- INSERT --".  Almost everything you type after the "i" will be inserted into the document you are editing.  Type "hello world".  All you can do in insert mode is insert text.

* Exit insert mode by pressing the Esc (escape) key.  You are now back to command mode.  Ensure that the "-- INSERT --" no longer appears at the bottom of the screen.

* Press "i" to return to insert mode.  Type something (anything).  Notice that what you type is showing up _before_ the "d" in "world".  That's probably not what you want.

* Press Esc to return to command mode.  Let's get rid of what you typed.  Press "u" to run the Undo command.

* Now press "a" to enter "append" mode.  The append mode is exactly like insert mode except that the first character you type shows up _after_ the character the cursor is initially sitting on.  Now type something and note where the characters appear.
 
* Return to command mode.  Run the quit command (":q") to exit vi.  It shouldn't let you because there are unsaved changes.  Note that the error says "...(add ! to override)".

* Let's enter one more line of text before exiting.  Type "o" to enter "open" mode, as in "open a new line below the cursor".  Type "goodbye, world".

* Run ":q!" to force the quit, thereby discarding what you've typed so far.

###Simple Moves

* Run vi again, but this time give it the name of a file.  Run "vi test.txt".  Note that the left shows the file name and "[New File]".  What mode do you think you're in?

* Enter insert mode and type "one two three five six seven eight".  Note that you shouldn't enter "four"!  Then return to command mode.

* Press "0" (zero).  What happened to the cursor?

* Press "$".  What happened to the cursor?  Press "0" again.

* Press "l" or the right-arrow key a few times.

* Press "h" or the left-arrow key a few times.  Early keyboards didn't have arrow keys, which is why the keys l and h (and j and i, which we haven't tried yet) can move you around one character at a time.

* Press "w".  What happened to the cursor.  Press "w" a few more times.

* Return to the beginning of the line by pressing "0".

* Press "e".  How is "e" different than "w".  Press "e" a few times.

* Press "b" until you're back at the start of the line.

* Press "3" and then "w".  Do it again.  Are you sitting on "e" in eight?  You should be.  Putting a number in front of a command repeats the command that many times.

* Press "6" and then "b".  What happened?

* You should now know enough to fix this line by inserting the word "four".  Do so.

* Save your changes and exit by typing ":wq" to "write and quit".  You should be returned to the terminal.

* Run "ls" to ensure your file is there.

###Deleting and Changing Text

* Run "vi test.txt" to edit the file again.

* Move to the "f" in the word "five".

* Press "x" five times.  The word five should disappear.  Press "u" five times to undo those changes.

* Now press "5x".  Press "u" to undo the change.  Note that when you use a number in front of a command undo treats that as a single operation.

* Now press "dw", for "delete word".  Press "dw" twice more.  "five six seven" should be gone.

* Press "u" to undo the deletion of "seven".  Now press ^R to Redo that operation (thus undo-ing the undo).


##C++

* cd to your cs210/lab1.2 directory if you aren't already there.

* Use vi to create a new file called "hello.cpp" and enter the following program:

    
<pre>
    #include &lt;iostream&gt;
    using namespace std;
    main()
    {
        cout << "Hello, World!" << endl;
    
        return 0;
    }
</pre>

* Save the file and exit vi.  Compile the program using gcc with "gcc hello.cpp -lstdc++".

* Run the resulting binary by typing "./a.out".

* Why do we need to prefix the "a.out" with "./"?  By default Linux won't check for executables sitting in your current directory.  Prefixing the executable with "." says to run the particular a.out executable in the current directory.

* Try compiling the application without the "-lstdc++" argument.  Try to familiarize yourself with the errors that appear.  Diagnosing the root cause of a problem from somewhat cryptic error messages is a skill you will develop.

* Use vi to edit the file, and change "Hello, World!" to "Goodbye, World!".  Save your changes and recompile.  Verify the right string appears when you run the application.

* Use vi to edit the file and comment out the "using namespace std;" by putting the comment characters "//" on the front of that line.  The line will read "// using namespace std;".  Now save, exit, and recompile.  Examine the errors displayed and see if you figure out why it's complaining.

* Use vi to prefix "cout" and "endl" with "std::".  This is an alternate way to get the right namespace.  Save, exit, and recompile.  Try to draw a comparison with namespaces in C++ and Python.

* Recompile with the additional gcc compiler flag "-Wall".  That flag turns on all warnings.  This is usually the best way to compile your applications.  Always compile with all warnings if you can, and always fix all the warnings that show up.  You will save yourself lots and lots of debugging hell if you follow the suggestions that come by turning on warnings.

* In this case the warning that appears is because we didn't declare a return type for the main() function, even though the ISO standard for C++ requires one.  Return to the file and add a return type of "int" so that the line looks like "int main()".  Recompile again and ensure the error is gone.

* Use man to look at the documentation for gcc.  There is lots and lots of it.  Search for what the "-Wall" flag does by pressing the forward-slash key "/" and then typing your search term (for example, "Wall") and then press "Enter".  That will begin a search.  You can then press "n" to find the next (and the next and the next) instances of that search term.  The sixth or so occurrence of "Wall" describes what it does.

* Change hello.cpp to call a function in an external .cpp file.  To do so we need to also create a .h file with a prototype for the new function.  Change hello.cpp to look like the following:

<pre>
    #include &lt;iostream&gt;
    #include &lt;goodbye.h&gt;
    // using namespace std;
    main()
    {
        std::cout << "Hello, World!" << std::endl;
        goodbye();
    
        return 0;
    }
</pre>

* Create a file called "goodbye.h" with contents like the following:

<pre>
    void goodbye();
</pre>

* Create a file called "goodbye.cpp" with contents like the following:

<pre>
    #include &lt;iostream&gt;

    using namespace std;

    void goodbye()
    {
        cout << "Goodbye, World" << endl;
    }
</pre>

* Now compile the two .cpp files into a single binary using "gcc hello.cpp goodbye.cpp -ohg -lstdc++".  Run the new "hg" binary and verify the output is what you would expect.
 


