# Lab 09.05
## Lab 5

* Basic compiling
* Fixing Compiler errors
* Debugging Runtime errors
* Creating makefiles

# Part 1 The Compile

This lab contains a bunch of source code files. Git is used in order to keep track of changes made to the files. Run the following command to clone the git repository which contains all the files needed for this lab.

`git clone /home/faculty/mcarrier/pickup/cs210/lab05.git`

> Run `man git` for more information about git  
> Run `git clone --help` for more information about cloning  
> Run `git status` and `git diff` at any time to see the modifications you have made to the lab.  
> Git will be covered in more details in a later lab.  

Look at the contents of helloWorld.cpp. You will see it is a very simple file. This will be used to demo the conversion process of C++ to Assembly.

Compile helloWorld.cpp  
`g++ helloWorld.cpp -o helloWorld.x`

Run the program (`./helloWorld.x`) and verify the output. Not very much going on here…

Lets take the C++ code and compile it into assembly.

`g++ -S helloWorld.cpp`

Review helloWorld.s and take note of how many lines the C++ code has now expanded into. Simple modifications can be made here to strings without knowing too much about assembly.

Finally lets view the binary file which was created during the compile process.

`vim helloWorld.x`

You should see a ton of garbage on the screen. This is because the data has been compiled into a binary format. We can make this a little bit easier to read by switching vim to a Hex mode.

Run this command inside of vim
`:%!xxd`

Next lets search for the string "hello world!" `:/hello world`

You should see a line similar to this:
`00006c0: 6865 6c6c 6f20 776f 726c 6421 0000 0000  hello world!….`

With careful editing it is possible to make changes to the binary data and save the file without having to recompile. With much difficulty programs can have their behavior altered without having access to the original source code by making changes like this.

Close the file without saving `:q!`

Make a new folder called yourLastName_lab5 and move all the files starting with hello into it.

### Many files and compile errors

The remaining source files in the directory are used together to build a simple program which displays articles from Wikipedia.

Lets build the program by compiling 

`g++ main.cpp`

```
[@cwolf lab05]$ g++ main.cpp
main.cpp: In function ‘int main()’:
main.cpp:4:2: error: ‘Controller’ was not declared in this scope
main.cpp:4:14: error: ‘controller’ was not declared in this scope
main.cpp:4:31: error: expected type-specifier before ‘Controller’
main.cpp:4:31: error: expected ‘;’ before ‘Controller’
main.cpp:11:9: error: type ‘<type error>’ argument given to ‘delete’, expected pointer
```
This is the first error of many in this lab. While it appears there are 5 errors, there is actually only 1. The main.cpp file is making use of a class called Controller which is contained in the Controller.h file. By adding this file to the top with an include statement the main program will have the class declared and the rest of the errors related to this missing will be fixed.

`#include "controller.h"`

This partially fixes the issue, but now a new error appears.

```
[@cwolf lab05]$ g++ main.cpp
/tmp/ccQPb5zo.o: In function `main':
main.cpp:(.text+0x1c): undefined reference to `Controller::Controller()'
main.cpp:(.text+0x2c): undefined reference to `Controller::displayMenu()'
collect2: error: ld returned 1 exit status
```

The main file has imported a file with a class named Controller.h which defines a Class called Controller. However it also needs to be compiled like the main.cpp file.

Multiple files can be compiled at the same time by listing them. Try compiling them together.

`g++ main.cpp controller.cpp`

Another error has now occurred.

```
[@cwolf lab05]$ g++ main.cpp controller.cpp
/tmp/ccEh6tah.o: In function `Controller::displaySearch()':
controller.cpp:(.text+0xa5): undefined reference to `View::drawSearch()'
/tmp/ccEh6tah.o: In function `Controller::displayArticle()':
controller.cpp:(.text+0x127): undefined reference to `Repository::getArticleForQuery(std::string)'
controller.cpp:(.text+0x149): undefined reference to `View::drawArticle(Article*)'
/tmp/ccEh6tah.o: In function `Controller::displayMenu()':
controller.cpp:(.text+0x1c5): undefined reference to `View::drawMenu()'
collect2: error: ld returned 1 exit status
```

This error is reporting that there is a function that is being used in the controller class that is called `drawSearch()` but it isn't referenced anywhere in the file. It does mention that it is lives in the `View::drawSearch()` class.

Running the command `head` on `controller.h` will show that there is file included called `view.h` This is another `cpp` file that we will need to add as a dependency to our compile list.

Compile again now with the view.cpp file included.

`g++ main.cpp controller.cpp view.cpp`

```
[@cwolf lab05]$ g++ main.cpp controller.cpp view.cpp
view.cpp: In member function ‘void View::drawArticle(Article*)’:
view.cpp:22:2: error: ‘cout’ was not declared in this scope
view.cpp:22:2: note: suggested alternative:
In file included from view.cpp:1:0:
/usr/lib/gcc/x86_64-redhat-linux/4.7.2/../../../../include/c++/4.7.2/iostream:62:18: note:   ‘std::cout’
view.cpp: In member function ‘std::string View::drawMenu()’:
view.cpp:45:2: error: expected ‘;’ before ‘}’ token
```

More errors! Once again going from the top line down the first error mentions that `cout` is not declared in this scope. This is probably due to the namespace not being declared. There are two ways of fixing this kind of error. Declare the namespace or put `std::` in front of any lines that `cout` appears on.

Make the fixes needed and try compiling again.

```
[@cwolf lab05]$ g++ main.cpp controller.cpp view.cpp
view.cpp: In member function ‘std::string View::drawMenu()’:
view.cpp:45:2: error: expected ‘;’ before ‘}’ token

```

Fix the above error and attempt to compile again.

> __HINT:__ Sometimes the errors refer to one line, but it is really the next line that it has happened on due to new lines and indenting.

After compiling again a new error shows up. Once again complaining about another undefined reference. Find the file that contains the Repository class and tack it on to the compile list.

```
[@cwolf lab05]$ g++ main.cpp controller.cpp view.cpp
/tmp/ccSVI0Y2.o: In function `Controller::displayArticle()':
controller.cpp:(.text+0x127): undefined reference to `Repository::getArticleForQuery(std::string)'
collect2: error: ld returned 1 exit status

```

After compiling with the missing class this error should appear. We are almost to the end of the compiler errors.

```
repository.cpp: In function ‘size_t writeCallback(char*, size_t, size_t, void*)’:
repository.cpp:14:10: error: ‘uint’ was not declared in this scope
repository.cpp:14:15: error: expected ‘;’ before ‘c’
repository.cpp:14:22: error: ‘c’ was not declared in this scope
repository.cpp: In member function ‘Article Repository::getArticleForQuery(std::string)’:
repository.cpp:35:2: error: ‘CURL’ was not declared in this scope
repository.cpp:35:8: error: ‘curl’ was not declared in this scope
repository.cpp:37:19: error: ‘CURL_GLOBAL_ALL’ was not declared in this scope
repository.cpp:37:34: error: ‘curl_global_init’ was not declared in this scope
repository.cpp:38:24: error: ‘curl_easy_init’ was not declared in this scope
repository.cpp:43:25: error: ‘CURLOPT_URL’ was not declared in this scope
repository.cpp:43:49: error: ‘curl_easy_setopt’ was not declared in this scope
repository.cpp:44:25: error: ‘CURLOPT_WRITEFUNCTION’ was not declared in this scope
repository.cpp:47:24: error: ‘curl_easy_perform’ was not declared in this scope
repository.cpp:57:24: error: ‘curl_easy_cleanup’ was not declared in this scope
repository.cpp:58:22: error: ‘curl_global_cleanup’ was not declared in this scope
```

At the top of `repository.cpp` it appears we are forgetting to include the system curl library. Uncomment `#include <curl/curl.h>`

Since this is a library and not a file that is located in the same directory as our project we are going to link against it by adding a linker flag to the very end. `-lcurl`

`g++ main.cpp controller.cpp view.cpp repository.cpp -lcurl`

With the library linked all of the curl related errors are now gone and we are left with just one last error about a missing reference to the Article class. Add the article.cpp file to the list of things to compile.

```
[@cwolf lab05]$ g++ main.cpp controller.cpp view.cpp repository.cpp -lcurl
/tmp/ccQmcVGj.o: In function `Repository::getArticleForQuery(std::string)':
repository.cpp:(.text+0x279): undefined reference to `Article::Article()'
collect2: error: ld returned 1 exit status

```

> This is the same curl library used by the command line program to access data over a network.

`g++ main.cpp controller.cpp view.cpp repository.cpp -lcurl article.cpp`

Adding a cpp file to the list in this case worked previously before, but this error is slightly different now.

```
[@cwolf lab05]$ g++ main.cpp controller.cpp view.cpp repository.cpp -lcurl article.cpp
article.cpp:2:1: error: ‘Article’ does not name a type

```

Look at the article .cpp file. Notice that it has forgotten to include the article.h file. Add this to the very top and try compiling again.

```
[@cwolf lab05]$ g++ main.cpp controller.cpp view.cpp repository.cpp -lcurl article.cpp
[@cwolf lab05]$

```

Finally! There are no more compile errors. There should be an output file named `a.out`

> Optionally you can include a flag that is `-o program.x` which will name your program something other than `a.out`

Try running the file to see what it does.

# Part II GDB
### Runtime Error

`Segmentation Fault` the bane of all programmers.

Runtime errors are crashes that occur during program execution.

Compile again but this time using the `-g` flag. This will include a symbol table used by `gdb` to help debug.

> __NOTE:__ It is important to include the -g flag or the symbol table will not be included and gdb will not be as helpful.

`[@cwolf lab05]$ g++ -g main.cpp controller.cpp view.cpp repository.cpp -lcurl article.cpp`

Using gdb the debugging of runtime errors can become much easier.

`gdb program.x` or `gdb a.out` depending on if you added the -o flag.

Type `run` or `r` to start the program execution.

A bunch of text comes up on the screen from the segmentation fault.   
Type `backtrace` to see the call stack.

You should now see the call stack.

```
(gdb) backtrace
#0  std::basic_string<char, std::char_traits<char>, std::allocator<char> >::basic_string (this=0x7fffffffe170, __str=
    <error reading variable: Cannot access memory at address 0xffffffffffffffe8>)
    at /usr/src/debug/gcc-4.7.2-20121109/obj-x86_64-redhat-linux/x86_64-redhat-linux/libstdc++-v3/include/bits/basic_string.tcc:175
#1  0x000000000040247e in View::drawMenu (this=0x604050) at view.cpp:47
#2  0x0000000000401ff9 in Controller::displayMenu (this=0x604030)
    at controller.cpp:30
#3  0x000000000040186c in main () at main.cpp:8
```

Type `frame 3` to view that frame and then the command `list` to view the lines.

> `list <number>` will display lines starting from the given number.

Frame 3 is the outermost function. We need to go deeper…

Type `frame 1`. This is typically the frame the crash has occurred on although sometimes it might be in a library call, so you might have to go up to `frame 2` to get to where your code ends.

```
(gdb) frame 1
#1  0x000000000040247e in View::drawMenu (this=0x604050) at view.cpp:47
47		return options[-1];
(gdb)
```

Type `list 32` to view starting on line 32. Then press enter twice to show the rest of the code.

Use the command `print choice` to see what the choice variable contains.

Use the command `info locals` to view all of the local variables in this frame.

Write your answers down to the 5 questions below in a file called `answers.txt`

__1. What are the contents of the options variable?__  

__2. Describe what you think is wrong with this section of code?__

Quit GDB by typing `q` and pressing enter.
Fix the error and recompile all of the files.

`g++ main.cpp view.cpp repository.cpp controller.cpp article.cpp -lcurl -g`

Try to run the program again. It looks like there is another error. This time in a different file. Use the steps above to inspect the frame the crash occurred on and then inspect the local variables.

__3. `print sampleData` What is the contents of it?__  

__4. `print array` and then run `ptype`. What is the type of array?__

Run `info locals` to see the contents of all the local variables.

__5. What do you think is wrong with indexing into the array with such a high number?__

Quit GDB and go back into vim and comment out or remove the lines following `//Sample Data` in `repository.cpp` except for the return statement.

Compile to program again and see if it crashes anymore. If it is working properly you should be able to pick and option and its contents will be pulled down from Wikipedia and displayed in the terminal.

Use `ctrl`+`c` to quit the program.

#### Basic GDB Commands

* `help` | `h`
* `run` | `r`
* `where` | `backtrace` | `bt`
* `frame` | `f`
* `print` | `p`
* `list` | `l`
* `ptype` | `pt`
* `continue` | `c` 
* `quit` | `q`
* breakpoint | `bp <line number>`
* `info locals` - Current Stack Frame
* `info variables` - All globals and static variable names
* `make` - This can be ran from gdb if a make file is available. This is handy if you have two windows open. One for gdb and another for editing.

[GDB Cheat sheet](http://watts.cs.sonoma.edu/UsefulStuff/gdb-refcard.pdf)

### Submission is in Part III

# Part III The Make File

At this point you should be able to build and run the project without any errors. Now it is time to create a makefile to simplify the build process.

* Use the example that is on the board as a reference to build your own. Your makefile should include the following:
	* Ability to compile project based on proper dependencies
	* A run command to execute the application
	* A debug command to debug the application
	* A clean command to remove object files

You can test your make file by running `make`  
Clean `.o` files by running `make clean`  
Run the project by running `make run`  


__Tips:__  

* Should only need to use `head` to complete this lab.  
*  tabs should be used for each section before g++  
* Header (h) files don't have any dependencies in the makefile. They are included from the implementation files (cpp)
* In Most cases targets will only depend on h files changing except for their own cpp files  
* Only 1 cpp file per dependency line at most  
* d.o files only with the top compile section

The format looks like this:

```
<target> <colon> <dependency> <dependency> <…>
<tab> <g++> <flags> <target>
.
.
```

__Example:__  

```
targetname.x: dep1.o dep2.o dep3.o ...
	g++ -g -Wall -o targetname.x dep1.o dep2.o dep3.o ...

dep1.o: dep1.cpp dep1.h dep3.h
	g++ -g -Wall -c dep1.cpp

clean:
	rm -f *.o *.x
	
run:
	./targetname.x [optional arguments]
```

# Submission

1. Run the command `git diff > yourLastName_lab5.diff`
2. Copy `yourLastName_lab5.diff`, `makefile`, `answers.txt`, and `helloworld.s` into the `yourLastName_lab5` folder.
3. Make sure all of the files are in the folder 
4. Tar and gzip `yourLastName_lab5` 
5. Copy `yourLastName_lab5.tgz` into the dropbox. `/home/faculty/mcarrier/dropbox/cs210/2013.09.05/`
6. [Check here](http://carrier.cs.sonoma.edu/submissions/lab5.txt) to see if you have submitted. You have to wait a minute after submitting before it will update.

